I am joined by Tom Greco, our President and Chief Executive Officer; and Jeff Shepherd, our Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer.
I hope you and your families are healthy and safe amid all that we've endured over the past 12 months.
Here at Advance, we are incredibly grateful for the way our entire team persevere.
When the reality of COVID-19 defended on our communities in March of 2020, we found ways across AAP to meet new unfamiliar challenges with innovation and agility.
As an essential business, their efforts have been critical to keep America moving during a time of great needs.
As you've heard from us throughout this pandemic, we remain focused on three overarching priorities.
First, protect the health, safety and well being of our team members and customers.
Second, preserve cash and protect the P&L during the crisis.
And third, prepare to be even stronger following the crisis.
Our results in Q4 and for the full year demonstrate that our unwavering focus on these priorities has enabled meaningful progress toward our long-term goals.
From the beginning, we've invested in compensation for our frontline and distribution center team members, enhanced benefits, cleaning, personal protective equipment and innovative ways to serve our customers.
This helped ensure that our team members and customers feel safe coming into work and to shop.
Our store and distribution center team members continuously stepped up throughout the year, and they are the true heroes for us.
In spite of many obstacles for our team, we saw significant improvements in organizational health and increased engagement scores throughout the year.
Fundamentally, we are building trust in the Advance brand at an enduring time for the world and one that our team members and customers will always remember.
We're confident our COVID-19-related investments, which we believe will subside over time, are strengthening our employment brand, our customer brand and our corporate reputation for the long-term.
In Q4, we delivered comparable store sales growth of 4.7% and margin expansion of 17 basis points.
This includes an 82 basis point headwind related to COVID-19.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share improvement of 14% to $1.87, including a $0.22 headwind related to COVID-19.
For the full year, we delivered top-line growth resulting in record net sales of $10.1 billion.
Adjusted operating income improvement of 4.1% to $827.3 million, including a $60 million headwind related to COVID-19.
Record adjusted diluted earnings per share of $8.51, including a $0.66 headwind related to COVID-19.
And we also returned $515 million to shareholders through share repurchases and our continued quarterly cash dividend.
Jeff will cover more on the details of our financials shortly, but first, let's review our operational performance.
COVID-19-related factors continued to affect channel performance in Q4 across our industry.
DIY omnichannel led the way, as it has since Q2.
It's well documented that consumers are spending more of their time at home, likely contributing to the shift in discretionary spending from services to goods.
Given economic uncertainty and elevated unemployment, many consumers are choosing lower cost options for vehicle repairs and maintenance, benefiting our DIY omnichannel business.
Our professional business continued to recover with positive comp sales in both Q3 and Q4.
Miles driven remained below prior year, in particular, for higher income workers working remotely who generally take their cars to pro shops.
This has limited growth in certain professional sales channels and in key categories like brakes.
Geographically, all of our eight regions posted positive comps in the quarter, led by our southernmost regions, including both the Southeast and Southwest.
Meanwhile, our Mid-Atlantic and Northeast regions remained below our reported growth rate.
As previously discussed, large urban markets in these regions have been more impacted by COVID-19 with the most significant decline in miles driven.
The good news is that while there remains a gap between our highest and lowest performing regions that spread continues to narrow.
We're cautiously optimistic this will further narrow in Q1 based on improving trends and more favorable winter weather early in the year.
With respect to categories, DieHard is driving record battery sales and led our growth in Q4.
In addition, appearance chemicals remained strong, a trend that began with the stay at home orders last April.
Across our professional business, our team continues to leverage our industry-leading assortment of national brands, OE parts and own brands.
For pro customers, there is nothing more important than having the right part in the right place at the right time.
To enable this, we continued to strengthen our Dynamic Assortment tool, which is now live in all our corporate stores and more than 700 independent locations that have opted in.
This machine learning platform has enabled significant improvements in product availability, helping drive over 60 basis point improvement in Q4 close rates.
In addition, we continued to make enhancements to our online portal, MyAdvance.
The ease of access and wide array of resources available now includes features like virtual training, which has been essential during the pandemic.
The resources we provide through our Carquest and WorldPac technical institutes allow our pro customers, including all technicians within those shop to attend interactive virtual training.
Additionally, we continue to update our comprehensive catalog of technical service bulletins through our MotoLogic platform.
We believe pro customers are recognizing and appreciating our investments to improve parts quality, product availability, delivery speed and the digital experience, resulting in higher enterprise pro online sales and share of wallet.
These actions have also enabled growth of our Technet customer base with approximately 1,400 new Technets added in 2020.
Finally, we continued increasing our Carquest Independent locations in 2020, welcoming 50 new stores.
Our independents remain a valuable component of our overall strategy and our team remains focused on further expansion.
Moving on to DIY omnichannel, we gained share in every region and across most categories in both Q4 and for the full year based on the syndicated data available to us.
We believe our share gains are the result of our focus in four areas.
First, the launch of DieHard.
Second, building awareness in regard of Advance through differentiation.
Third, improving customer loyalty through Speed Perks.
And fourth, improving store execution.
Starting with DieHard, despite the challenges of the pandemic, our team successfully launched DieHard as planned and executed a marketing plan unlike anything we've ever done before at AAP.
Our DieHard is Back campaign, featuring Bruce Willis, let consumers know that the iconic DieHard brand was back and they can now buy DieHard at Advance and Carquest.
This campaign is already improving top of mind and unaided awareness for DieHard.
Our Speed Perks program is an important tool to drive customer loyalty.
Our team continues to invest in personalization for Speed Perks members, driving higher engagement, long-term loyalty and increased share of wallet.
In 2020, we grew our VIP members, those with an annual spend of $250 to $500 by nearly 15%.
And our Elite members, those with annual spend of more than $500 by more than 20%.
To wrap up the discussion on DIY omnichannel, we continue to see improvement from our initiatives, including our net promoter scores.
This gives us confidence that we're on the right track to sustained sales and share momentum in 2021.
Moving on to an update of our four pillars of margin expansion, I'll begin with sales and profit per store.
As a reminder, following three consecutive years of declining sales per store, we finished 2017 at approximately $1.5 million per store.
Over the last three years, we've been optimizing our footprint, including the closure of 273 underperforming stores.
Our sales per store have now grown for three consecutive years.
And we finished 2020 at nearly $1.7 million per store.
We're also executing a focused agenda to leverage payroll, while reducing shrink, returns and the factors to drive four wall profit per store improvement.
In addition, the ongoing focus on team members is enabling us to attract the very best parts people and to reduce turnover.
Our team members are a differentiator for Advance.
And four years ago, we made a commitment to dramatically improve retention.
Continued investment in our unique Fuel the Frontline program with more than 22,000 stock grants awarded since inception is creating an ownership culture.
In the current environment, with an increased competition for talent, we are reducing store turnover and enhancing our employment brand.
We now have three straight years of comp sales growth and the closure of underperforming stores behind us.
We're excited to announce that we plan to expand our store base and geographic footprint this year and expect to open 50 to 100 new stores.
Our second margin expansion pillar is supply chain.
While we paused our cross banner replenishment and warehouse management system initiatives early in 2020, our team found ways to innovate and make progress on these productivity opportunity later in the year.
The expansion of cross banner replenishment is on track with the timing we communicated in November.
As we finished the year with just over 40% of the originally planned stores completed, we are on track to complete the originally planned stores and DCs by the end of Q3 2021 and the full run rate savings will come beginning in Q4 2021.
In addition, the implementation of our new warehouse management system or WMS continued in Q4.
We converted our fourth DC by year end as planned and we're on track to complete our largest buildings this year.
We believe we can capture roughly 75% of the savings from this initiative in 2022.
Moving on to category management, the expansion of our own brand assortment is a key component.
This includes an increase of Carquest-branded assortment in engine management and undercar.
Carquest has an excellent reputation with installers and new products have been very well received by both pro customers and Carquest Independents.
In 2020, we also launched our strategic pricing initiative to enhance our capabilities, while incorporating customer decision journey insights into price and discount decision making.
Finally, our fourth pillar of margin expansion involves reducing and better leveraging SG&A.
The successful execution of our field restructure, back office consolidations and safety initiatives benefited SG&A in the quarter and will enable further improvement in margin expansion going forward.
As we called out in November, SG&A was elevated in Q4, primarily due to COVID-19-related expenses and other factors that Jeff will detail shortly.
To summarize, we're now in execution mode on our key growth and margin expansion initiatives.
Our mission is Passion for Customers Passion for Yes.
With the goal of serving them with care and speed, we've made many necessary changes at AAP in recent years.
But one thing that has not changed is the current technology, the passion and the commitment of our team members and independent partners.
Our actions have strengthened Advance, enabling us to compete more vigorously.
Finally, we're very excited to share our third sustainability and social responsibility report next month, and we'll be providing a strategic update of our long-term plans on April 20.
With that, I'll pass the call to Jeff to discuss our financial results in greater detail as well as our 2021 guidance.
I too would like to begin by expressing my gratitude to all our team members for the extraordinary focus and effort throughout 2020 despite the unprecedented times.
Our entire team adjusted, adapted and continued to execute our priorities.
In Q4, our net sales of $2.4 billion increased 12%.
Adjusted gross profit margin expanded 192 basis points to 45.9%.
driven primarily by inventory-related items, cost and price improvements as well as supply chain leverage.
As our primary focus throughout the year was on the health and safety of our team members and customers, we temporarily paused our physical inventory counts earlier this year.
When we resumed these in Q4, our actual shrink rates were far better than we had anticipated.
This resulted in a benefit in inventory-related costs due to a reduction in the reserve to reflect the positive result.
LIFO-related impacts were a tailwind this quarter versus prior year.
This will be the last quarter we included LIFO impacts in our adjusted financial results as we will begin reporting in Q1 2021 excluding any benefits or expenses from LIFO and our adjusted financial measures.
We believe this adjustment creates a more accurate picture of our operational results and is more in line with industry practices.
Our Q4 adjusted SG&A expense was $913.5 million.
On a rate basis, this represented 38.6% of net sales compared to 36.9% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
The single biggest driver of this increase was $19 million in COVID-related costs directly attributable to the unanticipated spike in case rates.
We also incurred higher Q4 medical claims as a result of lower claims during the prior quarters.
In addition, our short-term incentive compensation for both field and corporate team members was higher than prior year.
Separately, we invested behind the launch of The DieHard is Back campaign.
We also incurred lease termination costs related to the ongoing optimization of our real estate footprint.
We believe these expected investments in DieHard and lease optimization will result in top and bottom line improvements.
Despite higher SG&A expenses, adjusted operating income increased 14.6% in Q4 to $171.8 million.
On a rate basis, our adjusted OI margin expanded by 17 basis points.
Finally, our adjusted diluted earnings per share was $1.87, up 14% from prior year despite a $0.22 impact in the quarter from COVID expenses.
For the full year, which includes an additional week versus 2019, we delivered record net sales of $10.1 billion, which increased 4.1%.
The 53rd, added approximately $158 million to sales.
Our adjusted gross profit increased 5% year-over-year and adjusted gross profit margin expanded 38 basis points.
Adjusted SG&A expense for full year 2020 increased 5.2% from 2019 results.
This was primarily the result of COVID-related expenses discussed earlier as well as the 53rd week.
We estimate the additional week resulted in a headwind of approximately 1.5% to our SG&A costs in the year.
Our adjusted operating income increased 4.1% to $827.3 million.
And our OI margins was 8.2%, flat compared to prior year.
Adjusting for the $60 million in COVID costs, our adjusted operating income margin expanded 59 basis points.
Our full year 2020 adjusted diluted earnings per share was $8.51, which is a new record for Advance and includes a headwind of $0.66 related to COVID costs.
We estimate the impact of the 53rd week was a tailwind from approximately $20 million to adjusted operating income and a benefit of approximately $0.23 to our reported adjusted earnings per share for the year.
Our capital expenditures in Q4 was $75 million for a total investment of $268 million for the year and in line with our previously stated expectations.
As we've noted, some of the critical transformation investments we expected to make in 2020 will pause for a portion of the year.
As a result, we expect our capital spending will increase this year compared to 2020.
Our free cash flow for the year was a record $702 million compared to $597 million in 2019.
This increase was driven by several factors, including efforts we have made to improve working capital.
We made meaningful progress on our AP ratio in 2020, delivered 300 basis points of improve and ended the year at 80.2%.
This in addition to a $76 million tailwind associated with the CARES Act resulted in a significant improvement in our cash conversion cycle.
Our strong cash flow generation allowed us to continue our share repurchase activity in Q4.
For the year, we repurchased more than $458 million of Advance stock.
And including our quarterly cash dividend, we returned $515 million to shareholders.
Our team remains disciplined throughout 2020 to ensure adequate liquidity, protect the P&L during the pandemic and strengthen our balance sheet, which resulted in meaningful improvement in our cash position, resulting in $835 million in cash on hand at year end.
Further demonstrating our confidence in the long-term strength of our business and commitment to return cash to shareholders in a balanced approach utilizing both share repurchases and dividends, our board recently approved a continued payment of our quarterly cash dividend.
While uncertainty remains in the current environment, we believe that we can continue to carry the momentum we have seen in the back half of 2020 forward.
As the economy continues to recover and with our planned new store openings, we expect to deliver increased net sales and additional margin expansion.
Importantly, we expect miles driven to continue improving throughout 2021, which should enable year-over-year growth in our pro business.
We're encouraged by trends through the first four weeks of 2021.
With strength across our DIY omnichannel and pro business, we delivered double-digit comparable sales growth to start the year.
We recognized the importance of transparency.
Despite continued uncertainty, we're pleased to provide our 2021 guidance.
Comparable store sales growth of 1% to 3%.
Adjusted operating income margin rate of 8.7% to 8.9%, which includes margin expansion of 60 to 80 basis points.
That's compared to the 2020 adjusted operating income margin excluding the $20.1 million benefit from the 53rd week.
Income tax rate of 24% to 26%.
Capital expenditures of $275 million to $325 million.
And a minimum of $600 million of free cash flow.
Finally, as Tom mentioned, following several years of closing underperforming stores and focusing on the improvement of operations across our footprint, we're excited to being actively growing our store base and expanding existing and new geographies.
For the first time in four years, we're guiding to new store openings of 50 to 100 locations.