It would be a gross understatement to say that 2020 was a year like no other year.
COVID-19 brought an incredible amount of suffering, inconvenience and unfortunately death with it.
It's humbling that our company benefited from such a tragedy and at the same time it's a tribute to our employees working in the midst of the pandemic and dealing with our own issues caused by it that we were able to respond as well as we did to the increased needs of consumers as they cope with COVID and the resulting quarantine.
Bruce will go through the financial details in a moment, but the headlines for the year are that net sales increased 18.5% to $1.968 billion and adjusted EBITDA increased 19.4% to $361.2 million.
This remarkable increase slowed temporarily in the fourth quarter and I will discuss the factors lead me to use the word temporarily.
As Dave just discussed, we generated unprecedented financial results during fiscal 2020.
Delivering company record net sales, adjusted EBITDA, and adjusted diluted earnings per share for the year.
We reported net sales of $1.968 billion in fiscal 2020, an increase of $307.5 million or 18.5% compared to the prior year.
Fiscal 2020 net sales included approximately $27.8 million in net sales from our acquisition of Crisco.
Crisco closed on December 1, 2020, providing with a full month of net sales.
We generated adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses of $374.8 million in fiscal 2020, an increase of $72.3 million or 23.9%.
During 2020 we incurred approximately $13.5 million in incremental COVID-19 costs at our manufacturing facilities, which primarily included temporary enhanced compensation for our manufacturing employees, compensation we continue to pay manufacturing employees while in quarantine and expenses related to other precautionary health and safety measures.
Inclusive of these costs, we reported adjusted EBITDA of $361.2 million, which is an increase of $58.7 million or 19.4% compared to last year.
Adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses as a percentage of net sales was 19% in fiscal 2020.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales after including approximately $13.5 million in COVID-19 costs incurred during the year was 18.4%.
Adjusted EBITDA as a percentage of net sales was 18.2% in fiscal 2019.
We reported net sales of $510.2 million in the fourth quarter, an increase of $40 million or 8.5%.
Fourth quarter 2020 net sales included approximately $27.8 million in net sales from our acquisition of Crisco.
We generated adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses of $77.6 million in the fourth quarter, an increase of $8.1 million or 11.7%.
During the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, we incurred approximately $4.3 million in incremental COVID-19 expenses at our manufacturing facilities.
As a result we reported adjusted EBITDA of $73.3 million in the fourth quarter, an increase of $3.8 million or 5.6%, from $69.5 million in the prior year period.
We reported $2.26 adjusted diluted earnings per share in fiscal 2020, an increase of $0.62 per share or 37.8% compared to the prior year.
We reported $0.35 in adjusted diluted earnings per share in the fourth quarter of fiscal 2020, an increase of $0.07 per share or 25% compared to the prior year.
Fiscal 2020 net sales increased by $307.5 million, which included an increase in base business net sales of $244.5 million and an increase in net sales from acquisitions of $63 million.
Of the $244.5 million increase in base business net sales, $209.8 million was attributable to increased base business volume.
Of the $63 million of net sales from acquisitions, $33.7 million was attributable to an additional seven and one-half months of Clabber Girl net sales in fiscal 2020 and $27.8 million was attributable to one month of Crisco net sales.
Fiscal 2020 base business net sales also benefited from $35.8 million in net pricing, inclusive of our spring 2019 list price increase, our 2019 trade spend optimization program as well as the impact of COVID-19, which resulted in lower than average daily trade promotions during the height of the pandemic.
Keep in mind that our pricing calculation also includes an element of favorable mix as we saw less spices in the foodservice channel, which tend to be priced at a lower margin.
FX was a drag on net sales of a little bit more than $1 million for the year.
We estimate that the extra reporting week in fiscal 2020, which occurred in the third quarter contributed approximately $35 million to our net sales.
Leading our brand performance was Green Giant, which reached approximately $639 million in net sales during fiscal 2020, marking an increase of $112.2 million or 21.3% for the year.
Green Giant outperformance was largely led by shelf-stable with Green Giant Le Sueur shelf-stable net sales up by approximately $64.8 million or 39.7% for the year.
Green Giant shelf-stable had COVID-19 enhanced sales that led to extraordinary performance that began in the second half of March and carried through to the end of the third quarter.
As we hit the fourth quarter, we began to manage sales closely through the implementation of certain customer allocations to ensure there we had sufficient product to last us until this summer's pack season.
As a result, Green Giant shelf-stable net sales were flat in the fourth quarter, despite elevated demand and double-digit consumption trends that persist today.
Net sales of Green Giant frozen products were up double digits for the year, plus $47.4 million or 13.1%.
Among our other larger brands, Cream of Wheat had one of the best performances in fiscal 2020, with net sales up by approximately $12.9 million or 21.6% for the year.
Cream of Wheat continue to outperform in the fourth quarter with net sales up by $2.7 million or 16.1% compared to the prior year period.
Clabber Girl also had very strong performance as part of what we believe will be a lasting resurgence in baking.
Net sales of Clabber Girl products were up by approximately $10.2 million or 18.9% during the comparable period of time that we owned it, following the mid May 2019 acquisition.
We have been very pleased with the performance of Clabber Girl business which generated approximately $97.5 million in net sales during our first full year of ownership compared to our expectations at the time of acquisition of approximately $75 million of net sales.
Net sales of Clabber Girl were up by approximately $2.5 million or almost 10% in the fourth quarter compared to the year-ago period.
Net sales of Ortega were also up double digits during fiscal 2020 with an increase of $17.9 million or 12.7% compared to the prior year.
Supply chain constraints, driven by industry wide taco shell capacity constraints, limited the upside for the fourth quarter.
And as a result while our net sales growth was impressive with a $2.5 million increase or 7.3% compared to the prior year period, we could have done much more had we add incremental product supply.
Victoria was also one of the larger gainers in the portfolio, increasing net sales in fiscal 2020 by $11.3 million or 26.4% compared to the prior year.
Net sales of Victoria reached nearly $55 million in 2020.
While consumption remains strong throughout the year, net sales dropped approximately $0.6 million dollars or 4.7% in the fourth quarter, primarily due to the timing shift of a large promotional event with one of our key club customers that moved from fourth quarter 2019 to the third quarter 2020.
Net sales of Maple Grove Farms were up by approximately $6.1 million or 8.7%, impressive performance given that a substantial portion of Maple Grove Farms business is sold through the foodservice channel, which went dark for a significant portion of the year.
Fourth quarter performance showed nice improvement as well, with net sales up $2.1 million or 12.2%, driven by continued strong consumption trends and an improvement in the foodservice side of the business.
Our spices & seasonings, including our legacy brands such as Ac'cent and Dash and the brands we acquired in 2016, such as Tones and Weber were up by $30.9 million or 9.2% for the year.
Net sales of spices & seasonings reached $367.7 million in fiscal 2020.
The retail side of this business began to show strong momentum by June as more and more Americans began to fully embrace cooking and seasoning their meals at home, a trend which continues in 2021.
The foodservice side of the business continues to be down, but it's slowly improving.
In the fourth quarter net sales of our spices & seasonings increased by $2.1 million or 2.4%.
Despite the outsized performance for the year, our spices & seasonings could have increased even more even with a drag from foodservice had we had incremental supply.
Among our other larger brands, New York Style had challenges both in foodservice and to a lesser degree in the retail deli.
Net sales of New York Style were down $1.8 million, 4.5% for fiscal 2020 compared to the prior year.
Gross profit was $481.7 million for fiscal 2020, or 24.5% of net sales.
Excluding the negative impact of approximately $5 million of acquisition divestiture-related expenses, the amortization of acquisition-related inventory fair value step-up and non-recurring event -- expenses included in the cost of goods sold, our gross profit would have been $486.7 million, or 24.7% of net sales.
Gross profit was $383.1 million for fiscal 2019 or 23.1% of net sales.
Excluding the negative impact of approximately $22 million of acquisition divestiture-related expenses, amortization of acquisition-related inventory fair value step-up and non-recurring expenses included in cost of goods sold our gross profit would have been $405.1 million, for 24.4% of net sales.
Outside of COVID-19 related expenses, including those described previously at our factories and those from our co-packers, inflation remained somewhat benign throughout a significant portion of 2020.
However, we did begin to see inflation starting late in the third quarter and accelerated into the fourth quarter particularly for freight costs, certain agricultural products and other ingredient costs and packaging.
I will discuss inflation a little bit more in our 2021 outlook, but we expect to see inflationary pressures continue in the coming months and we are working to alleviate these pressures in our 2021 budget.
Selling, general and administrative expenses for the year were $186.2 million or 9.5% of net sales.
This compares favorably to the prior year as a percentage of net sales, which included $160.7 million in selling, general and administrative expenses or 9.7% of fiscal 2019 net sales.
The dollar increase in SG&A was composed of increases in selling expenses of $8.2 million, increases in consumer marketing investments of $7.7 million, increases of warehousing expenses of $2 million and increases in G&A of $10.7 million.
Increases in SG&A including increases in selling, brokerage, and incentive compensation that are tied to increased sales and profitability.
These increases were offset in part by a reduction in acquisition divestiture-related and non-recurring expenses of $3.1 million.
As I mentioned earlier, we generated $374.8 million in adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses and after the inclusion of $13.5 million in COVID-19 expenses, adjusted EBITDA of $361.2 million.
This compares to adjusted EBITDA of $302.5 million in 2019.
We generated $2.26 in adjusted diluted earnings per share in fiscal 2020 compared to $1.64 per share in 2019.
The increase was primarily driven by volumes, including COVID-19 driven demand for our products as well as the acquisitions of Clabber Girl in mid May 2019 and Crisco in December 2020.
Adjusted diluted earnings per share were also positively driven by increased adjusted EBITDA margins despite the impact of COVID-19 costs due to the benefits of our increased sales as well as lower effective cost of borrowing.
We had another strong year for cash, with net cash provided by operating activities of $281.5 million, which more than supported our long-standing dividend policy and helped us reduce our net debt before taking into account debt incurred to finance the Crisco acquisition and our pro forma net leverage.
As a reminder, we began the year with net debt to pro forma adjusted EBITDA of approximately 6.12 times, we reached nearly 4.75 times at the end of the third quarter and finished the year with pro forma net debt to adjusted EBITDA before COVID-19 expenses of approximately 5.21 times, which is our consolidated leverage ratio as calculated for purposes of our credit agreement.
Our increase in net cash provided by operating activities allowed us to reduce net debt by approximately $135 million over the course of the year, excluding our acquisition of Crisco.
Our 2021 outlook includes an expectation for elevated net sales of our products in the early month, driven by consumption that has remained over 10% higher than pre-pandemic levels on a blended basis across the B&G Foods portfolio for nearly every week of the last 11 months.
We don't expect to exceed our net sales for March, April or May 2020 when there is a surge in sales driven more by pantry loading than by consumption.
Our current year is off to a tremendous start, as we have strong expectations for fiscal 2021, especially when compared to 2019.
As a result of the challenges faced while trying to forecast COVID-19, we are not able to provide a detailed financial forecast at this time.
However, what I can say is that we expect to generate company record net sales of $2.05 billion to $2.1 billion in 2021 inclusive of the full benefit of a full year of the Crisco acquisition.
We do expect 2021 to bring us a different set of challenges than we faced in 2020 and these challenges will include a return of inflation across a number of key input costs, including certain agricultural products, packaging, and freight as mentioned earlier.
As in prior years, our expectation is that we will manage these costs through a combination of pricing, initiatives, and cost savings activities to preserve our margin profile and our cash flows.
As you can see in those numbers the great majority of our brands grew in fiscal 2020, some substantially because of the dramatic effects of COVID on consumer buying and dining patterns.
E-commerce was a growing driver of those trends and we invested during the year to follow consumers as they bought more through various online means and we saw sales through those means of buying grow in return.
Although there is no precise way to measure this, using IRI and other data sources, we believe that our online sales grew by roughly 150%, albeit from a relatively modest base.
We expect that trend to continue in 2021 and are investing further in building out our online presence and to marketing with various retailers on their site, so that we can be at the forefront of this new way of selling.
Our business also benefited from the low concentration of sales in the foodservice channel versus retail.
Before COVID, roughly 13% of our net sales were to foodservice customers.
In 2020 that number decreased to 9% as foodservice sales softened and retail sales grew.
We are seeing modest recovery in the channel and expected to strengthen as the year progresses.
But in general, declines in brands such as Regina and softness in Wright's New York Style, and Maple Grove are the result of higher proportion of their sales to foodservice.
Several other trends in our business in 2020 are encouraging as we move forward into 2021.
Household penetration of B&G Foods brands grew by 900 basis points and the average sale of B&G products per purchase grew by 25%.
As we expand our digital capabilities, we're able to track the consumers involved in these trends and invest more specifically in reinforcing their purchases.
Our consumption trends consistently showed double-digit increases that placed us at near or at the top of comparable food companies and those trends continue in 2021.
We increased our marketing spending by approximately 20% for the year last year and over 50% in the fourth quarter to reinforce those gains and speak to all consumers about our brands that are driving growth.
Despite all the positives, the year's performance does not reflect the full potential of changes in consumer behavior.
We saw serious supply chain capacity issues in the second and third quarter and were unable to fully meet demand on brands that offered meal solutions such as Ortega and Bear Creek.
Spices & seasonings sales were also affected by manufacturing capacity issues, packaging outages, and absenteeism due to COVID related quarantine.
Our policy at our facilities has been to be very aggressive in terms of quarantine employees with pay who had any type of exposure.
That has paid valuable dividends in terms of employee safety, but often left the facilities short-handed and increased our costs.
Early on in the fourth quarter, we realized that due to crop conditions and co-packer capacity issues, the supply of Green Giant shelf-stable products would not meet the elevated demand we were seeing and place those products on allocation, resulting in relatively flat sales for the quarter.
We will not see meaningful relief in this area until the summer when the new crop arrives.
Since we took that action we've seen competition take similar actions, not surprising since we were all affected by a relatively poor crop last fall.
Turning to a closer look at the fourth quarter, it would be easy to say that the business returned to a more normal footing with base business sales up just 2.5%.
Frankly, we don't see it that way.
One thing I have remarked on since returning is how closely consumption trends track the actual demand we see in the business.
That's more true now than it was six years ago.
As noted earlier, our consumption trends remain very strong.
What we saw in the fourth quarter was a relatively soft November and December and in factory sales do we believe to retailer stocking up late in Q3 in anticipation of strong demand over the holiday season.
That demand did not materialize to the extent they anticipated and inventories had to be worked off.
At the back end of the quarter, there was a shift in timing of the typically soft sales week at year-end.
In 2019, that week fell in our financial January while in fiscal 2020 it fell at the end of December.
The effect is easy to illustrate January 2020, excuse me 2021 base business sales were up 35%.
The year-over-year difference, accounting for roughly 5% of fourth quarter net sales.
Adjusted EBITDA for the fourth quarter was handicapped by $4.3 million in COVID related expenses that were not compensated for by increased sales and an additional spend of $4.5 million in marketing.
Given that we remain very optimistic about 2021.
Our sales continue to be strong, a reflection of the consumption trends and our service levels continue to improve as we add capacity in our workforce strengthens and returns.
While we are still experiencing COVID related expenses, the rate of spending is trending downward and should not be near the $13.5 million cost, we saw in the last three quarters of 2020.
Our growth through innovation was handicapped in 2020 as retailers canceled resets and focused on maintaining inventory of existing products.
Despite that the limited launches, we managed to do in 2020 combined with incremental sales of 2019 new products accounted for roughly 2% of our net sales, or $45 million.
The successful items in that group will see further expansion of the distribution in fiscal 2021 and will be joined by new product introductions and a variety of brands with special focus on Green Giant frozen and Ortega products.
2021 will also see a full year of ownership of the iconic Crisco brand, which we acquired on December 1 and which made significant accretive contributions to our fiscal 2020 results in just one month.
We are integrating the brand into our company as we speak and expect to have it fully integrated by the end of the summer.
The brand brings with it strong sales, reinforced by COVID trends and very attractive margins.
The acquisition profile fits our model perfectly in terms of purchase price, financing costs, tax advantages, EBITDA margin, and free cash flow from EBITDA.
We believe that there are good opportunities for the brand to grow in both new distribution and new products and we will be working to execute both in 2021.
As Bruce mentioned, this year is not without its challenges.
We are seeing significant cost pressure on a variety of fronts, including transportation packaging and commodities.
Our operations group has done a good job of protecting us where possible, but there is still exposure that we must cover.
We plan to do that through a combination of pricing, rationalization of trade programs and an enhanced cost reduction program.
We've already taken some of those actions.
Price increases on the Underwood brand and Green Giant shelf-stable products went into effect last month, more are necessary and will follow.
In my opinion cost relief on some elements of costs such as commodities is uncertain.
There will be significant competition for what crops get planted this year and the outcome is in doubt until the harvest this fall.
Progress in 2020 that's well worth noting includes a heightened recognition of the corporate responsibilities of B&G Foods.
As we approach the threshold of $2 billion in net sales.
The year saw the formation of a new Corporate Social Responsibility committee at the Board of Director level.
Its mission to direct and oversee our efforts to meet our corporate social responsibilities to our employees, customers, communities and other stakeholders.
During 2020, we also adopted and published on our website a new human rights policy and a new environmental health and safety policy.
And most recently, we have established an employee directed diversity equity and inclusion counsel to help understand and meet the needs of our employees, while achieving appropriate workforce diversity, equity, and inclusion throughout the company.
While we have already had efforts in place on these fronts, the company has more completely formalized those efforts and is committed to increasing all of our efforts and investments.
When we look at fiscal 2021 and try to estimate how we will perform.
I have to admit that it's a major challenge.
The year has started off with very good momentum, but we will soon reach the sales weeks when consumers were loading their pantries in 2020 with everything and anything and we cannot expect to match those weeks.
But as 2020 stabilized in the third quarter and fourth quarter we saw more of the "new normal" trends that we think will continue and could support increased sales versus fiscal 2019.
There is no doubt that many people will continue to work from home for at least part of their work week.
We like to believe that consumers have discovered or rediscovered the satisfaction of cooking and baking at home.
And the savings that they can reap from doing so.
We are investing to foster more baking at home, in particular, very appropriate since approximately 19% of our sales are in brands that are involved in baking.
And we believe that we can retain many of the new customers who discovered our brands and will market in a traditional way and online to do so.
All of that leads us to estimate that we will have base business net sales that will exceed 2019 net sales by approximately 10%, with 11 months of Crisco net sales incremental to that.
I wish I could call out fiscal 2021 with more precision in that, but we obviously are in very unchartered waters in many ways.
We continue to believe that our shareholders are best served by the operating model that we have had in place since we went public in 2004.
Strived for modest organic growth in our base business of well-established brands, they are on a larger growth component via accretive acquisitions and return a meaningful proportion of free cash flow to shareholders through dividends.
This strategy has resulted in a net sales compound annual growth rate of 11% since our IPO in 2004 and an adjusted EBITDA CAGR of 11.9%.
Since our IPO, B&G Foods has paid out $1.73 billion in dividends.
We believe that we have served our shareholders well by making those payments.
On average over the years, dividends have represented approximately 60% of free cash flow.
In 2020, that payout ratio was about 54%, lower than normal due to the remarkable surge in operating results.
I'd like to conclude with the final shout out to our employees, all of whom have made this company successful in an extremely challenging year and in particular to the workers, who have been on the front line in our manufacturing facilities, distribution centers, and offices.
On a daily basis making sure we can supply the foods that consumers need.
Other workers have made important contributions as well even while working from home, a less than ideal scenario in many cases.
Without all of their dedicated efforts, we could not have achieved the records that were set in fiscal 2020 or have begun 2021 with the prospect of another successful year.
This concludes our remarks.
And now we would like to begin the Q&A portion of our call, operator?