For those of you that have not, it is available on the Investor Relations section of our website at investor.
Actual results in the future may be materially different than those discussed here.
This could be due to a variety of factors including, among other things, uncertainties associated with the duration and severity of the COVID-19 pandemic and related impact on the economy and supply chain.
The company believes that these non-GAAP financial measures provide meaningful insight into the company's operational performance and cash flows, and provides these measures to investors to help facilitate comparisons of operating results with prior periods and to assist them in understanding the company's ongoing operational performance.
For the month of December, 2020, our results represent the consolidated statements of the company and its subsidiaries, and is based on the financial position and results of operations as a stand-alone company.
For all periods prior to December 1st 2020, combined financial statements include all revenue and cost directly attributable to the company and an allocation of expenses from our former parent related to certain corporate functions and actions.
First, let me take a moment to recognize all of our talented team members for their determination and commitment in 2020, which enabled Aaron's to accelerate our key strategic priorities in a very challenging year.
Our fantastic team members at our stores, distribution and service centers, Woodhaven manufacturing and store support center worked tirelessly to provide products and services to our customers, while accelerating our digital and real estate transformation.
We overcame the challenges posed by the COVID-19 pandemic, while continuing to meet the needs of our customers and safeguarding our team members.
At the same time, we delivered annual revenues that exceeded our expectations for the year and an adjusted EBITDA that was higher than we've generated in several years.
In addition, during the year, our team has worked diligently to establish Aaron's as a new stand-alone publicly traded company.
The spin-off transaction closed on November 30th 2020.
And following the spin, we are well positioned with a strong balance sheet and cash flow profile to execute on our go-forward strategy.
While some uncertainty remains regarding how the Corona virus may impact the economy or consumer behavior, I'm more energized and optimistic about our future than ever.
Our business has never been more nimble, and we continue to make investments in technology, decisioning, e-commerce and store operations that are yielding higher productivity and lease portfolio performance.
In the fourth quarter of 2020, same-store revenues rose 3.4% as compared to the prior year quarter, primarily due to strong customer payment activity, improving lease portfolio size and higher retail sales.
The fourth quarter was the sixth out of the last eight quarters with positive same-store comps, with 2020 representing the first annual positive same-store revenue growth since 2013.
Additionally, we ended 2020 with a larger and healthier lease portfolio than we had at the beginning of the year.
The larger portfolio size is a result of better collections, fewer product returns and lower write-offs, which was enabled by improvements in operational execution, the roll-out of centralized decisioning technology and enhancements to our customer payments platform.
We achieved this larger portfolio despite revenue written into the portfolio that was flat in the fourth quarter.
Recall that our implementation of decisioning technology in the second quarter of 2020 effectively reduced new lease originations and therefore, revenue written by 6% to 8%.
Moving to our e-commerce channel.
Revenues grew 39% in the quarter and represented approximately 13% of total lease revenues compared to 10% in the fourth quarter of 2019.
In the fourth quarter, e-commerce traffic was up 29% compared to the fourth quarter of 2019.
Despite the significant increase in traffic at aarons.com, e-commerce recurring revenue written into the portfolio declined 1.2% as compared to last year's fourth quarter, due to both decisioning optimization and lower conversion of traffic.
Conversion is not what we would expect it to be due to the inventory shortages resulting from the global supply chain disruption.
However, our inventory position continues to modestly improve in the first quarter of 2021, which should lead to higher conversion rates.
I'm encouraged by the progress of our e-commerce initiatives, including our evolving analytics and digital capabilities.
Improvements in online customer acquisition, conversion and decisioning are leading to margin growth and continued positive momentum in this important channel.
In 2020, we also accelerated our strategy to consolidate, remodel and reposition our store footprint with our new GenNext store concept, which includes enhanced shared rooms, digital technologies, expanded product assortment and improved brand imaging.
As of the end of the year, we had 47 GenNext stores opened and have more than 60 additional stores in the 2021 pipeline.
Our GenNext stores are performing well, delivering new lease volumes that are higher than the corporate averages and in line with our expectations.
While the new stores still represent a small portion of our overall store count, we believe over time the execution of our GenNext store strategy will provide meaningful lift to our overall performance.
Overall, I'm pleased with our full year of 2020 and fourth quarter results.
And I'm encouraged about the future and our new chapter as a financially strong stand-alone public company.
As we look to 2021, we remain focused on our key strategic initiatives of simplifying and digitizing the customer experience, aligning our store footprint to our customer opportunity and promoting the Aaron's value proposition of low payments, high approval rates and best-in-class service.
For the full year 2020, consolidated revenues were $1.735 billion, a decline of 2.8% compared to the full year 2019.
This decline is primarily the result of a reduction of 253 company-operated stores in 2019 and 2020 partially offset by a 1.8% increase in same-store revenues for the year.
Adjusted EBITDA for the full year 2020 was $208.9 million, an increase of $43.6 million or 26.4% compared to the full year of 2019.
As a percentage of revenues, adjusted EBITDA was 12% compared to 9.3%, an increase of 270 basis points over the prior year.
This increase in adjusted EBITDA is primarily due to an improvement in customer payment activity, fewer lease merchandise returns and efficiencies in store operations, including pandemic-related staffing reductions in the second and third quarters of 2020.
Write-offs were 4.2% of lease revenues in 2020, a 200 basis point improvement over 2019.
Annual non-GAAP earnings per share was $3.02 in 2020, an increase of 43.8% compared to $2.10 for prior year 2019.
Turning to the fourth quarter of 2020.
Revenues were $430 million, a decrease of approximately 1% compared to the same quarter last year, despite the closure, consolidation and acquisition of a net 75 company-owned locations throughout the year.
Adjusted EBITDA was $53.7 million for the fourth quarter compared to $51.2 million for the same period of 2019, an increase of $2.5 million or 4.8%.
Adjusted EBITDA margin was 12.5% of revenues compared to 11.8% in the same period a year ago, an increase of 70 basis points.
The improvement in Q4 2020 adjusted EBITDA margin was primarily due to the reduction in inventory write-offs, partially offset by comping over the impact of one-time benefits realized in the fourth quarter of the prior year period.
These one-time items in 2019, related primarily to gains from real estate sale and leaseback transactions and other miscellaneous items.
Excluding these one-time items from 2019, adjusted EBITDA margin in the fourth quarter of 2020 would have improved approximately 250 basis points.
Diluted earnings per share on a non-GAAP basis for the quarter increased 11.3% to $0.79 versus $0.71 in the prior year quarter, primarily due to the continuing strength of customer payment activity and reduced lease merchandise write-offs.
Operating expenses were down $1.2 million as compared to the fourth quarter of 2019, primarily due to an $11.7 million reduction in write-offs, offset primarily by an increase in advertising spend and the previously mentioned benefit of real estate transactions that took place in the fourth quarter of the prior year.
During the fourth quarter of 2020, the company's store labor expense increased compared to the second and third quarters, during which labor expenses were lower due to pandemic-related store closures and furloughs.
Write-offs in the fourth quarter were 4.3%, down 300 basis points from the prior year fourth quarter, due primarily to the implementation of our new decisioning technology, improved operations and the benefit of government stimulus.
Cash generated from operating activities was $355.8 million for the 12 months ended December 31, 2020.
Cash from operating activities grew $169.8 million year-over-year, primarily due to improved lease portfolio performance, lower inventory purchases and one-time tax benefits resulting from the CARES Act, partially offset by other changes in working capital.
At the end of the year, the company had a cash balance of $76.1 million and less than $1 million of debt.
In addition, concurrent with completing the spin-off transaction of November 30th, the company entered into a $250 million unsecured revolving credit facility, which was undrawn at the end of 2020, giving the company more than $300 million of liquidity as of year-end.
Before I review our outlook for 2021, I want to remind you all that in November, prior to completing the spin-off transaction, the legacy combined company accelerated the payment of its regular quarterly cash dividend, which would normally have been paid in January 2021.
Turning to our 2021 outlook.
We currently expect total revenues in the range of $1.65 billion to $1.7 billion.
Adjusted EBITDA is expected to be in the range of $155 million to $170 million, representing an increase in the midpoint of our outlook as compared to the preliminary outlook we provided in November.
As it relates to the seasonality of our financial results, we expect that both revenues and earnings will be somewhat higher in the first six months of 2021 compared to the second six months of 2021.
Free cash flows, which we define as operating cash flows of less capital expenditures, are expected to be $80 million to $90 million.
Capital expenditures are also expected to be between $80 million and $90 million for the year.
This outlook assumes a few key items we want to highlight.
First, no significant deterioration in the current retail environment or in the state of the U.S. economy as compared to its current condition.
Second, a gradual improvement in global supply chain conditions.
And finally, no incremental government stimulus or supplemental unemployment benefits.
To summarize, 2020 was a successful year for Aaron's, despite the many challenges our team members and customers faced.
To echo Douglas's earlier comments, I am encouraged by the opportunity ahead of us.
The unique nature of Aaron's recurring revenue business model combined with our strong balance sheet, cash flows and operating leverage enables us to perform well during this period of uncertainty.